Fireside Chat Reflection

Training to be a Soccer Player Rather than a Tennis Player

After listening to parts of Shareef's Fireside Chat, it's clear that Dev Bootcamp isn't solely trying to mold us into coding monkeys. Rather, they are instilling the qualities and mindset needed to have a successful path as a world class junior developer.

I must say that hearing Shareef talk about the whole class and break the class into people who come in with a CS degree or extensive programming knowledge, as well as those who are towards the bottom of the class. It was also reassuring to know that a small percentage of students are asked to repeat cohort stages.

It was also comforting to hear how the program has grown and how much introducing a prep period has softened the learning curve. As someone who attempted joining a very early cohort, over two years ago, I'm confident in my belief that everything in life happens for a reason and you will start doing something at the appropriate time, when you are ready for it (and "things are meant to be" as my mother would say). I know personally that I am more prepared now than I was two years ago, both personally and professionally. The same can be said of the Dev Bootcamp program.

The main takeaway that I had from Shareef's speech was that even though we are making sacrifices to attend Dev Bootcamp, ultimately what will determine what we come out of the program with depends on our approach to the learning. Shareef provides two examples of approaching education. The first is the consumer mindset, which in many ways we are conditioned to approach education. Bishay likens this consumer mindset to that of a restaurant patron. We've paid our tuition, we see what is being offered by the program, and we take our seats and let the work come to us. Alternatively, and the way I hope to approach the program is the creator or kitchen mindset. We arrive into the program with our aprons on and ready to get our hands dirty and grab the proverbial bull by the horns. While this is counterintuitive to the Western educational model, by taking ownership over our experience, we can ensure that we get the most out of the program and ultimately put ourselves in a better position to succeed.

Which brings me to my final point. The reason that I am drawn to DBC is the synergy-based model of group learning. All my life, I've always been a part of and drawn strength from being a part of a team. Shareef takes this a step further by stating that peer to peer sessions are the industry-norm so in addition to sharpening our programming skills, we'll also be sharpening our people skills. Rather than giving us the individual skills needed to succeed (a la a tennis player), the goal is to mold us into soccer players, or team players who work best and are well attuned to working in a group.